d’Heilly. 1 
Gavin d’Heilly 
Prof. Elizabeth Miller 
MCWP 125 
14 March 2023 
The Remarkable Promise of Role Embodiment Practices 
With all of the capabilities and intelligence available in the modern world, we are still plagued by important decisions (political being foremost among them) being riddled with biases & foolishness long understood. By engaging the individuals making these decisions with intimate experiences of new situations & perspectives through role embodiment practices, such as occurs in TTRPG’s (Table-Top Role-Playing Games), we can better equip them to battle the foolishness of automatic thinking in themselves and others. These practices have a particular specialty for this task because they can be implemented through any artistic medium, uniquely recreate the effects of identity developing experiences, and are naturally inclined to induce awe-inspiring & perspective-widening experiences. Through mitigating biases & improving the health of the decision making habits of participants, processes relying on a collaborative and ethical participant pool will have their speed & efficacy enhanced. 
The sources backing these arguments are a collection of research and ideation on the topics of perspective development, interactivity, immersion, and virtuous personality traits. All of them relate to Table-Top Role-Playing activities, but these relationships won’t be expanded upon until much groundwork is laid out. Yet even with this collection of sources, these topics are extremely contentious with a multitude of interpretations of each represented in the current academic discussion on the topics. That being said, this collected body of works represent what I
d’Heilly. 2 
found to be the most parsimonious, explanatorily powerful, and well-supported view on the combined topics. 
Now, to dive into the meat of this paper, you’ll first need solid understandings of some foundational concepts: foolishness, wisdom, identity developing experiences, and role embodiment practices. To begin with the problem, Robert Sternberg’s imbalance theory of foolishness describes foolishness as “a defect in tacit knowledge” (2002, 232), with tacit knowledge being “action-oriented knowledge acquired with little or no help from others” (233). It is when an individual lacks good sense or judgment in a situation, resulting from misinformed or incomplete practical knowledge (232), such as when making decisions in unfamiliar environments or making mistakes in any environment. This trait & property definition of Sternberg’s is particularly well suited to be compared against his definition of wisdom: when an individual utilizes tacit and formal knowledge to seek a common good (2004, 166). Specifically, through “... a balance among (1) intrapersonal, (2) interpersonal, and (3) extrapersonal interests, over the (1) short and (2) long terms, to achieve a balance among (1) adaptation to existing environments, (2) shaping of existing environments, and (3) selection of new environments” (165). He describes foolishness as a lack of tacit knowledge and wisdom as an abundance of tacit (& formal) knowledge which directs responses to environments for the purposes of balancing dynamic interests through time. These referenced environments are particularly important. Constructed of goals, rules, and rewards, environments makeup the spaces in which identities are developed, in which foolishness and wisdom are developed, and in which both are practiced (Karen Robson 412). These environment compositions surrounding a conscious agent provide environment specific identities, which are referred to as roles (or agencies) for the purposes of
d’Heilly. 3 
this paper. Practices which allow the adoption of environment specific goals, rules, and rewards, are role embodiment practices. To recap, this operational definition of environment provides a framework for defining roles where tacit/practical knowledge is developed, which foolishness and wisdom are both results of. 
Identities are the next emergent phenomena of this process: an individual's dynamic self categorization based on records of how their roles’ performances measure up to their role expectations over time. That is to say, within these roles (that are themselves within these environments), there are expectations which performances are measured against. The resulting measurement is used to summarize and categorize the perceptions of the self (Peter J. Burke and Jan E Stets 224). Once formed, this identity has lasting value for decision making: 
... given an opportunity to engage in some activity or some set of activities, a choice must be made. Identities influence the choices made. The activity that results from the choice has meanings that correspond to, reinforce, and display the identity meanings of the individual (Peter J. Burke and Donald C. Reitzes 91). 
They suggest that these measurements become multi-dimensional meanings that have a positive feedback loop effect with the perspective of the self, aka identity. As choices are made, the aggregate identity measurement shifts. As it shifts, the choices made change, further changing the measurement of performance versus expectation. 
Given this process of identity development, how does foolishness come about? How do these measurements not self correct and result in wisdom? As I have come to see it, foolishness is a (temporarily) unavoidable consequence of trying to learn in wicked environments. Wicked environments being contexts in which, “The rules of the game are often unclear or incomplete, there may be or may not be repetitive patterns and they may not be obvious, and feedback is often delayed, inaccurate or both” (Hillel Einhorn and Robin Hogarth 410). Given that this
d’Heilly. 4 
definition applies to real-world (& non-isolated) interactive environments, it is both a serious issue and a source of insight. Being that its properties of unclear rules, a lack of patterns, and untimely &/or inaccurate feedback are particularly detrimental to the development of tacit knowledge (where micro step-by-step understandings of systems determine success), it becomes understandable that humans and other conscious beings are at such a level of disadvantage in being sufficiently equipped with the tacit knowledge necessary for their endeavors. Especially ones of identity development, where the measurements, “... Are floating and contextual, and depend on the salience of the different classifications” (Peter J. Burke and Jan E Stets 231), where the meaning environment is mutated by the identity invoked (231), and where such invocations can occur at the level of roles, itemized behaviors of roles, or even the manner in which a behavior is performed (231). 
Because of this wicked environment of tacit knowledge which perspectives form within, conscious beings respond with over-corrective biases in their decision making habits, as well as their self perceptions. While all are susceptible, Robert Sternberg uniquely isolates people in positions of great power as being particularly vulnerable to these over-corrective biases: senses of omniscience, omnipotence, and invulnerability (2002, 235). These senses help protect an individual from negative measurements of their performance by hiding (making much less salient) measurements which do not reaffirm the senses of omniscience, omnipotence, and invulnerability. Individuals seeking, even unconsciously, to avoid these negative measurements is a state of mind and process named by Leon Festiner as cognitive dissonance: “This theory centers around the idea that if a person knows various things that are not psychologically consistent with one another, (they) will, in a variety of ways, try to make them more consistent”
d’Heilly. 5 
(1962, 93). Paralleling this definition and conceptualization of perspective altering experiences is Daniel Kahneman’s understanding of the systems of automatic (system 1) and effortful (system 2) thinking: “System 1 continuously generates suggestions for System 2… System 2 is activated when an event is detected that violates the model of the world that System 1 maintains” (2011, 24). As the authors imply, measurements which conform to the current perspectives occur without scrutiny or review. Meanwhile, measurements which conflict with current perspectives activate an effortful system and motivates the agent to resolve the discrepancy between experience and perception. When this is the process of perspective improvement, developing identities with senses of omniscience, omnipotence, and invulnerability built-in can hyper-incentivize the ignoring of measurements over the changing of behaviors. This results in an overreliance upon automatic thinking and an abundance of foolishness. With this complex understanding of the context and the problem, we can now move on to the solution. 
The use of role embodiment practices truly does have remarkable possibilities. Foremost among the causes of their promise is their ability to be implemented in any artistic medium. The key to this ability is partly composed of a definition of interactivity developed by the Aesthetic Philosopher Aaron Smuts, “... something is interactive for an individual if it responds in a way that is neither (1) radically random nor (2) almost completely controllable” (2009, 66). While sifting through the opinions of his peers, he elaborates that interactivity is a relational property: when you develop complete mastery over something it is no longer interactive (67). Within the context of other aforementioned sources, this defines interactivity as when an individual has incomplete tacit knowledge over an environment which is neither fully random nor fully predictable. Given our categorization of all (non-isolated) environments as wicked and wicked
d’Heilly. 6 
environments as being impossible to gain full tacit knowledge of, we can now logically claim that all environments are interactive. 
However, role embodiment practices need more than a surrounding environment to be interactive in order to be effectively implemented in any artistic medium. Having more tacit knowledge to gain doesn’t make an agent look for it, help them find it, or help them care about and internalize it. To accomplish those, artistic mediums need a clearly defined relationship between their components and the experience of an individual. Such a definition is used in the practice of gamification, “the application of game features, mainly video game elements, into non-game context for the purpose of promoting motivation and engagement in learning” (Karen Robsen et al. 411), where the MDE (mechanics, dynamics, and emotions) framework of interactive experiences link the functional components of experiences to the mental & emotional (422) (Figure 2). By defining the layers of mechanics (goals, rules, and rewards) dynamics (agent actions and mechanic use) and emotions (the qualitative feelings of the experience), Robsen et al. argue that gamification gives educators the ability to transform learning into a joyful experience by being able to better direct and motivate students (443). They even show how this claim is supported with, “... strong evidence to suggest a direct link between the effective use of gamification elements and meeting basic psychological human needs. Many of these needs are connected to self-determination theory” (442). Further affirming that these gamification practices apply to identity and perspective development and can be harnessed to affect both, as well as finishing the requirements for role embodiment practices to be able to be effectively implemented in any artistic medium.
d’Heilly. 7 
With a gamification framework, the effectiveness of role embodiment practices explode, significantly increasing their ability to recreate the feelings and effects of perspective & identity developing experiences. The power of storytelling combined with highly designable interactive experiences allow the development of immersive roles (made of mechanics, dynamics, & emotions) for agents to embody. The storied aspect of these roles are particularly important, as implied by Samuel Delaney’s depiction of stories told through language: 
“... using words to evoke a series of micromemories from your own experience that inmix, join, and connect in your mind… in effect, you have a sustained memory of something that never happened to you. That false memory is what a story is. (2014, 43) 
He further supports this definition when stating that, “A story is of the order of memory, that is why it takes place in the past, even when set in the future” (4). Through these sentiments, Delaney recontextualizes the retro-spective nature of storytelling as a feature of stories being made of memories rather than the storytelling necessarily taking place later in time than the subject matter. For our purposes, this has big implications: if you can design the role components (MDE) well enough for the agent's mind to stitch together a coherent narrative from micro-memories, you can effectively engage participants with false memories in real time. This allows tacit knowledge of roles at several levels (broadly categorized as role choice, role behavior choice, & manner of behavior choice (Samuel Delany 43)) to be acquired at once. 
A possible argument against the effectiveness of such a process is that the simulated experiences in memory can’t compare to a real experience. In games built around this practice, Table-Top Role-Playing Games (TTRPGs), people are just sitting in place and describing imaginary things happening to imaginary characters in imaginary places. You’d think that no matter how clear or well worded the descriptions are, they can’t reach the complexity and full
d’Heilly. 8 
experience of a natural interactive environment. In fact, you’d be right, but we don’t need perfection. We just need immersion. Or as Nguyen describes it: 
“…it is best described as a layered agency— as the creation of a temporary agency nested within our overall agency. This is because the ends of our primary agency continue to regulate the maintenance of the temporary gaming agency” (5) 
“... so long as the background monitoring processes of our full agency haven’t broken through with such a cancellation, we let the temporary agency regulate our decisions and dominate our consciousness” (443) 
As he explains in his work, by creating engaging enough false memories, you can effectively control and subsume a participant's awareness and experience. Allowing designed role embodiment experiences to be much closer to natural interactive experiences. 
Another argument poised to be levied against role embodiment practices is that they are made of those isolated environments which I was so careful to mention were not to be considered wicked. Designed experiences can only be finite and predictable. Right? Not right. As a Professor of Art Theory, Simon O’Sullivan argues that the capabilities of subjectivity lie in its harnessing of bounded infinities: when a finite space or area contains within it infinite subdivisions (2012, 277). Due to the finite nature of our awareness & infinite recursive complexity of the interpretive space of any human experience, especially partly-fictitious ones, subjective experiences are not isolated. They are not finite or wholly predictable. Role embodiment practices, being composed of MDE with emotions as a subjective experience, can’t be considered isolated either. In addition, identity development also occurs in relation to identity category hierarchies, where, “The levels (of identity hierarchies) are floating and contextual, and depend on the salience of the different classifications” (Peter J. Burke and Jan E Stets 231), showing another wicked environmental aspect of the practice, not to mention how, “In
d’Heilly. 9 
interactive fictions, the audience’s genuine ends, actions, and attitudes can interact with their make-believe ends, actions, and attitudes…” (C. Thi. Nguyen 451), further layering the whole system & process, providing even more confusing wicked learning environment properties. 
Yet, are immersion and a shared archetypal environment sufficient to develop real world applicable tacit knowledge from simulated events? Please consider the concept of hyper-reality: when reality and fiction are so woven together that they become impossible to tell apart (Wolny 76), developed when a process of, “... the meticulous reduplication of the real, preferably 
through another, reproductive medium…”, is undertaken (Wolfreys et al 52). These hyper-real recreations are extremely important and pervasive, as they are our lives. Our experience of them, anyways. Without fully objective perceptions and records of our experiences (which we certainly do not have), our worldview can be considered a mix of real and imagined information with no clear boundary between the two. Regardless of whether our experiences are natural or simulated, our experiences are always hyper-real. So, in the terms of Ryszard Wolny, both natural and simulated experiences are a type of simulation coined as “simulacrum”: reduplications of the real to such an extent that they mimic the real’s effects (75), as opposed to simulations which copy form, but not function. From the concepts of these works we can logically argue that role embodiment practices, even when wholly designed, include complex subjective experiences which effectively recreate natural perspective development processes. 
At this point we’ve established that role embodiment practices, including but not limited to TTRPGs, can be implemented in any interactive medium (which fits the MDE framework) with creative control and immersive power to such a degree that a participant’s experience can be subsumed. This immersed experience is achieved by procedurally guiding the agent into an
d’Heilly. 10 
intended narrative & identity which activates natural processes of perspective development. The question now becomes what we use it for, and what it’s naturally inclined to cause. Given that we’ve uncovered properties of role embodiment practices showing them to be infinitely complex, capable of creating memories of events that never happened, and involving dynamic identity development processes, the findings of research by Stellar et. al. on awe and humility becomes particularly poignant: 
… when individuals encounter an entity that is vast and challenges their worldview, they feel awe… Feelings of awe mediated the relationship between appraisals (perceptions of vastness and a challenge to one’s world view) and humility (Study 4), and self-diminishment mediated the relationship between awe and humility (Study 5). Taken together, these results reveal that awe offers one path to greater humility.” (258). 
Considering this suggested cause and effect of awe, role embodiment experiences become ripe mediums where awe can be infinitely elicited from participants, as entities of any combination of vastness and complexity are procurable in the subjective real-time false memory of the embodied roles story, effectively providing infinite fuel to fight against and dismantle feelings of omniscience, omnipotence, and invulnerability. TTRPGs are famous for this within their communities, where awe occurs so often at tables that players jokingly refer to playing the games as therapy, a spiritual experience, and a defining part of their personality. In fact, there are many currently ongoing programs where the activities are used to treat mental disorders (such as ASD) and perform therapeutic practices such as Cognitive Behavioural Therapy, Dialectical Behavioral Therapy, and more (Elizabeth Arvizue). For an explanation of why this repetition of awe exposure and tacit knowledge development leads to enhanced ethical decision making, we turn to Daryl Koehn’s article on a framework for universal ethics: 
“... (1) if we use practical wisdom to consider the objective human goods in play in concrete, problematic situations and (2) if we virtuously seek to realize as many of these objective goods as possible with a view to promoting the fulfillment and excellence of
d’Heilly. 11 
intrinsically social human beings, then we can arrive at possible solutions to situations that respect both Confucian and Kantian/Christian dignity. Such convergence is exactly what one expects if there are indeed … objective natural goods in this world (health, harmony, etc.) …” (2013, 714) 
In this passage, Koehn illuminates the stable axis of ethics upon which human decisions are made. Structuring the development of virtues involves balancing applications of tacit knowledge (decisions) for the goals of inter, intra, and exter-personal interests. 
These ideas, from deeply related fields of passion & research, reframe everyday phenomena and experiences into tools for soft skills and wisdom development. By identifying isomorphic attributes between identity development experiences and role embodiment practices, we are able to design instances of the latter to control the progression of the former. When used to share experiences, to guide a participant through a constructed perspective & position in time, repetition of this practice will result in the participant being much more deeply & directly aware of the variety & scale of the human experience. This awareness is of paramount importance in combating the most wicked environment of all: politics. With blurred motives infecting important discussions around the use of extreme powers, our hands which guide our actions can no longer afford to be foolish. Humanity’s survival will require awe and humility to guide the use of great power within the limits of great responsibility. Artists have always performed this public service: engaging audiences with role embodiment practices through every communicative medium available, but it’s time to perfect the system. We use our academic communities' awareness of the pieces of ourselves and our environments to identify their operational components and design or direct them for our collective benefit. It is our birthright as intelligent agents in the universe: to learn how to intelligently design our interactive experiences to optimally develop ourselves for our goals. I suggest that role embodiment practices are the
d’Heilly. 12 
optimal medium of this pedagogical process because they can be implemented through any artistic medium, uniquely recreate the effects of identity developing experiences, and are naturally inclined to induce awe & widened perspectives.
  

d’Heilly. 13
  

  

d’Heilly. 14 
  

(Hillel Einhorn and Robin Hogarth, 1978)
d’Heilly. 15 
Citations 
Stets, Jan E., and Peter J. Burke. “Identity Theory and Social Identity Theory.” Social Psychology Quarterly, vol. 63, no. 3, 2000, pp. 224–37. JSTOR, 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2695870. Accessed 25 Jan. 2023. 
Smuts, Aaron. “What Is Interactivity?” The Journal of Aesthetic Education, vol. 43, no. 4, 2009, pp. 53–73. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/25656247. Accessed 25 Jan. 2023. Burke, Peter J., and Donald C. Reitzes. “The Link Between Identity and Role Performance.” Social Psychology Quarterly, vol. 44, no. 2, 1981, pp. 83–92. JSTOR, 
https://doi.org/10.2307/3033704. Accessed 4 Feb. 2023. 
Delany, Samuel R. About Writing: 7 Essays, 4 Letters, 5 Interviews. Wesleyan University Press, 2014. Accessed 2 Feb. 2023. 
Nguyen, C. Thi. “Games: Agency as art”. Oxford University Press, USA, 2020. Accessed 2 Feb. 2023. 
Sternberg, Robert J. "What is wisdom and how can we develop it?" The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 591.1 (2004): 164-174. Accessed 4 Feb. 2023. Koehn, Daryl. “East Meets West: Toward a Universal Ethic of Virtue for Global Business.” Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 116, no. 4, 2013, pp. 703–15. JSTOR, 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/42002496. Accessed 12 Feb. 2023. 
Sternberg, Robert J. “Smart People Are Not Stupid, But They Sure Can Be Foolish: The Imbalance Theory of Foolishness.” Why Smart People Can Be So Stupid, edited by Robert J. Sternberg, Yale University Press, 2002, pp. 232–42. JSTOR, 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctt1npsdv.15. Accessed 12 Feb. 2023.
d’Heilly. 16 
Robson, Karen, et al. "Is it all a game? Understanding the principles of gamification." Business horizons 58.4 (2015): 411-420. Accessed 20 Feb. 2023. 
Stellar, Jennifer E., et al. "Awe and humility." Journal of personality and social psychology 114.2 (2018): 258. Accessed 20 Feb. 2023. 
Einhorn, Hillel J., and Robin M. Hogarth. "Confidence in judgment: Persistence of the illusion of validity." Psychological review 85.5 (1978): 395. Accessed Mar. 6 2023. 
Festinger, Leon. "Cognitive dissonance." Scientific American 207.4 (1962): 93-106. Accessed 8 Mar. 2023. 
Wolny, Ryszard W. "Hyperreality and Simulacrum: Jean Baudrillard and European Postmodernism." European Journal of Interdisciplinary Studies 3.3 (2017): 75-79. Accessed 12 Mar. 2023 
Wolfreys, Julian. Key concepts in literary theory. Edinburgh university press, 2013. Accessed 12 Mar. 2023 
O'Sullivan, Simon. On the production of subjectivity: Five diagrams of the finite-infinite relation. Springer, 2012. Accessed 12 Mar. 2023 
Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, fast and slow. Macmillan, 2011. Accessed 14 Mar. 2023 
Arvizu, Elizabeth Sanchez. “TTRPGs.” PsychologyforGeeks, 2023, 
https://www.psychologyforgeeks.com/r-r/ttrpgs. Accessed 17 Mar. 2023.